# BIOMD0000000506: MODEL1312040001

## Installation

Download this repository, and install with distutils

`python setup.py install`

Or, install using pip

`pip install git+https://github.com/biomodels/BIOMD0000000506.git`

To install a specific version (in this example, from the 2014-09-16 BioModels release)

`pip install git+https://github.com/biomodels/BIOMD0000000506.git@20140916`


# Model Notes


vanEunen2013 - Network dynamics of fatty acid β-oxidation (time-course model)

Lipid metabolism plays an important role in the development of metabolic
syndrome, a major risk factor for cardiovascular disease and diabetes. This
model gives insights into the response of lipid oxidation to dietart and
medical interventions. The model predicts the rate of lipid oxidation and the
time course of most acyl carnitines. There are two models described in the
paper, (i) steady-state model [
[BIOMD0000000505](http://identifiers.org/biomodels.db/BIOMD0000000505) ], (ii)
time-course model [
[BIOMD0000000506](http://identifiers.org/biomodels.db/BIOMD0000000506) ]. This
model corresponds to the time-course model.

This model is described in the article:

[Biochemical competition makes fatty-acid β-oxidation vulnerable to substrate
overload.](http://identifiers.org/pubmed/23966849)

van Eunen K, Simons SM, Gerding A, Bleeker A, den Besten G, Touw CM, Houten
SM, Groen BK, Krab K, Reijngoud DJ, Bakker BM.

PLoS Comput Biol. 2013;9(8):e1003186.

Abstract:

Fatty-acid metabolism plays a key role in acquired and inborn metabolic
diseases. To obtain insight into the network dynamics of fatty-acid
β-oxidation, we constructed a detailed computational model of the pathway and
subjected it to a fat overload condition. The model contains reversible and
saturable enzyme-kinetic equations and experimentally determined parameters
for rat-liver enzymes. It was validated by adding palmitoyl CoA or palmitoyl
carnitine to isolated rat-liver mitochondria: without refitting of measured
parameters, the model correctly predicted the β-oxidation flux as well as the
time profiles of most acyl-carnitine concentrations. Subsequently, we
simulated the condition of obesity by increasing the palmitoyl-CoA
concentration. At a high concentration of palmitoyl CoA the β-oxidation became
overloaded: the flux dropped and metabolites accumulated. This behavior
originated from the competition between acyl CoAs of different chain lengths
for a set of acyl-CoA dehydrogenases with overlapping substrate specificity.
This effectively induced competitive feedforward inhibition and thereby led to
accumulation of CoA-ester intermediates and depletion of free CoA (CoASH). The
mitochondrial [NAD⁺]/[NADH] ratio modulated the sensitivity to substrate
overload, revealing a tight interplay between regulation of β-oxidation and
mitochondrial respiration.

This model is hosted on [BioModels Database](http://www.ebi.ac.uk/biomodels/)
and identified by:
[BIOMD0000000506](http://identifiers.org/biomodels.db/BIOMD0000000506) .

To cite BioModels Database, please use: [BioModels Database: An enhanced,
curated and annotated resource for published quantitative kinetic
models](http://identifiers.org/pubmed/20587024) .

To the extent possible under law, all copyright and related or neighbouring
rights to this encoded model have been dedicated to the public domain
worldwide. Please refer to [CC0 Public Domain
Dedication](http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) for more
information.


